Drafting SL ref docs (#8709)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/reference/semantic-model-properties.md

---
title: "Semantic model properties"
id: semantic-model-properties
sidebar_label: "Semantic model properties"
description: "Complete property reference for dbt Semantic Layer semantic models: name, model, entities, dimensions, measures, and configuration."
keywords:
  - dbt semantic layer
  - semantic model
  - semantic model configuration
  - MetricFlow
---

Semantic models define the structure that MetricFlow uses to build the semantic graph. in the *latest spec*, they can be declared as a top-level `semantic_model:` block on a [model](/reference/model-properties). In the *legacy spec*, we used standalone YAML. For more information, refer to [Semantic models](/docs/build/semantic-models).

import LatestYamlSpecAvailability from '/snippets/_latest-yaml-spec-availability-versioned.md';

<LatestYamlSpecAvailability />

<VersionBlock firstVersion="1.12">

## Latest spec (model YAML)

In the latest spec, a model defines a `semantic_model:` block and optional top-level keys; dimensions and entities are defined at the column level.

> ### Available semantic model properties (latest spec)

Reviewer: I'm not sure where or how you would want to include it, but there's one case that left out here - the semantic_model property is actually of type bool | semantic_model_property_block .

If you just put `semantic_model: true`, you'll end up with a semantic model with all properties either matched to the regular model it references (for properties like "name", for example) or filled in with defaults.

Author: ok added [here](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/8709/commits/a49cc0463edf7b3bcbdcc91d5003d04e2e6b70aa)

| Property / location | Type | Required | Description |
|---------------------|------|----------|-------------|
| `semantic_model.enabled` | boolean | Yes | Must be `true` to enable the semantic model. |

> | `semantic_model.name` | string | No | Unique name; defaults to model name. |

Reviewer: nit: the limitation about dunders still applies in the new spec.  (this might be covered elsewhere; feel free to ignore if you don't think this nit is helpful)

Author: added in this commit https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/8709/commits/a49cc0463edf7b3bcbdcc91d5003d04e2e6b70aa

<LatestYamlSpecAvailability />

<VersionBlock firstVersion="1.12">

## Latest spec (model YAML)

In the latest spec, a model defines a `semantic_model:` block and optional top-level keys; dimensions and entities are defined at the column level.

### Available semantic model properties (latest spec)

| Property / location | Type | Required | Description |
|---------------------|------|----------|-------------|
| `semantic_model.enabled` | boolean | Yes | Must be `true` to enable the semantic model. |
| `semantic_model.name` | string | No | Unique name; defaults to model name. |
| `semantic_model.group` | string | No | Group for organization. |
| `semantic_model.config` | object | No | Supports [meta](/reference/resource-configs/meta), [group](/reference/resource-configs/group), [enabled](/reference/resource-configs/enabled). |
| `agg_time_dimension` (top-level) | string | Yes | Default time dimension for metrics; references dimension name. |
| `primary_entity` (top-level) | string | No | Primary entity name when no column has `type: primary`. |
| `columns` | array | Yes | Column list; each can have `entity:` or `dimension:` block; time dimensions have `granularity` on the column. |

> | `derived_semantics` | object | No | Optional dimensions and entities with `expr`. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `derived_semantics` (top-level) | object | No | Optional dimensions and entities with `expr`. |
```

| `metrics` (top-level) | array | No | Metrics derived from this semantic model; list is alongside (not under) `semantic_model`. |

In the latest spec, a model can define:

> - **`semantic_model:`** block (with required `enabled`) and optional top-level keys such as `agg_time_dimension` and `primary_entity`.

Reviewer 2: In the table above `agg_time_dimension` is marked as required

Author: Need to investigate. It's marked as required [here](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/semantic-models?version=1.12#semantic-models-components)

          name: optional_entity_name
      - name: my_time_dimension_column
        granularity: day    # required for time dimensions
        dimension:
          type: time
          name: my_time_dimension
      - name: my_categorical_dimension_column
        dimension:
          type: categorical
          name: my_categorical_dimension
    derived_semantics:    # optional
      dimensions: []
      entities: []
    metrics:
      - name: my_simple_metric
        type: simple
        agg: count
        expr: optional_expr
```

For the full structure and all options, see [Semantic models](/docs/build/semantic-models).

</VersionBlock>

<VersionBlock lastVersion="1.11">

## Legacy spec (standalone YAML)

Semantic models are defined in a top-level `semantic_models:` list in standalone YAML, with `model`, `defaults`, `entities`, `dimensions`, and `measures`.

### Available semantic model properties (legacy spec)

| Property | Type | Required | Description |
|----------|------|----------|-------------|
| name | string | Yes | Unique name for the semantic model. Avoid double underscores (`__`). |
| description | string | No | Documentation for the semantic model. |

> | model | string | Yes | The dbt model reference, e.g. `ref('my_model')`. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| model | string | Yes | The dbt model reference (for example, `ref('my_model')`). |
```

---
title: "Semantic model properties"
id: semantic-model-properties
sidebar_label: "Semantic model properties"
description: "Complete property reference for dbt Semantic Layer semantic models: name, model, entities, dimensions, measures, and configuration."
keywords:
  - dbt semantic layer
  - semantic model
  - semantic model configuration
  - MetricFlow
---

> Semantic models define the structure that MetricFlow uses to build the semantic graph. They can be declared in standalone YAML (see [Semantic models](/docs/build/semantic-models)) or in <Constant name="fusion" /> as a `semantic_model` block on a [model](/reference/model-properties).

Reviewer 2: The new spec is available on Fusion and dbt platform Latest (and soon in dbt Core v1.12)

## Available semantic model properties

> | Property | Type | Required | Description |

Reviewer 2: The properties listed here are part of the legacy spec. I suggest we create a new table with the properties for the new spec and version block both tables.

Author: done

| defaults | object | Yes (standalone, <Constant name="core" />) | Defaults for the semantic model; typically `agg_time_dimension`. In <Constant name="fusion" /> this is expressed as `time_dimension` / `agg_time_dimension` at the top level. |
| entities | array | Yes | Join keys and their type (primary, foreign, unique, natural). In <Constant name="fusion" /> entities can be defined at the column level. |
| primary_entity | string | No | Name of the primary entity if not declared on a column. Required if no column has `type: primary`. |
| dimensions | array | Yes | List of [dimension](/reference/dimension-properties) definitions (time or categorical). |
| measures | array | No | List of measures (simple aggregations). In <Constant name="fusion" /> also referred to as simple metrics. |
| label | string | No | Display name in downstream tools. |
| config | object | No | Supports [meta](/reference/resource-configs/meta), [group](/reference/resource-configs/group), [enabled](/reference/resource-configs/enabled). |

Version-specific behavior (standalone vs model-embedded, and exact property names) is documented in [Semantic models](/docs/build/semantic-models).

> ## Full structure (standalone YAML, <Constant name="core" /> style)

Reviewer 2: Instead of indicating `(standalone YAML, <Constant name="core" /> style)`, I think we should add both samples (legacy and new spec) and version block them
